Welcome back to this code challenge.
I hope you are feeling refreshed and ready to continue.
So here we are with exercise five.
The goal here is to run some analyses over all of the layers in the model, using the two functions
that you wrote in the previous two exercises.
And also I have some additional code in here to test for generalization performance.
So here you can see I am looping over all of the layers in the model.
So all the transformer blocks.
I'm also using this Tqdm library to get a progress bar to print out while it's running.
Okay, so the first step is to compress the training data using the PCA function from exercise three.
Then you run through the source separation function that you wrote for exercise four.
So so far this is not that interesting.
Just make sure you are assigning meaningful variable names to the outputs of these two functions.
The next thing to do inside this loop is to run some t tests.
So you want to calculate some t tests on for the him versus the her activations in the GED based on
him greater than her and also for the GED from her greater than him.
This is running a statistical test on exactly the data that we have used to create the eigenvectors.
That means that there is a risk of overfitting here.
Now, on the one hand, it is not trivial that the t tests will all be statistically significant, but
it certainly is true that these tests here will be biased towards a larger magnitude T value, because
they are the data that we used to define the eigenvectors.
Also keep in mind that because of the sign indeterminacy of the eigenvectors, we don't really care
about the sign of the t values here.
We just want to know their magnitude and their p value.
And that's why I just store the magnitude or the absolute value of the t value here.
You can also see that I'm organizing all of the results in this for loop into a big matrix that I call
GED results.
So that has a first dimension of the layers in the model.
So it's going to be 12 for GPT two small.
The second dimension is for the particular analysis that I'm storing these results from.
It turns out that that's going to be seven.
So there's going to be seven different sets of analyses that I am collecting data from.
And this is the first one here.
So the t test for the generalized eigendecomposition for him versus her, and then testing for activations
in him sentences or him targets versus her targets.
Okay.
And then the third dimension in this results matrix here is for the statistic value.
So the t value and the p value okay.
So that is the explanation of this t test.
This t test down here is exactly the same.
But this is from the GED vectors.
When you use the her activations for s and the Him activations for R, and I put those results into
the index one of this matrix.
And then over here we have the correlation up of the covariance patterns.
That's what I showed you how to calculate in the previous video.
So that's the R variable over there.
Now you also want to store the top two eigenvalues for the two geds, and also store the number of components
that it took to reach 99% of variance explained.
Now, so far, all of these analyses that I have described, those are all entirely about the training
set.
We haven't yet touched the test set.
And so that is the goal for the rest of this for loop over the different layers.
Okay.
So out of sample evaluation, that's what I call this here.
So first thing to do is get all of the target activations from the test set.
Now this is easier to do compared to the training set, because we created this data set such that the
target is always in the same position.
So the sixth position which is index five.
So you don't need a for loop here like you did with the training set.
But then you want to compress the data down to a lower dimensional space using the PCA vectors that
you got from the training set.
And when you get those lower dimensional data, you can then project them onto the vectors.
Again these are the vectors that you calculated from the training set.
This is important.
You do not run another generalized eigendecomposition on the test set.
You've already run the decomposition on the training set, and now you're just applying those same vectors
to the test set without recalculating any of the eigenvalues or the eigenvectors.
Okay.
So once you have that the last thing to do is to run some t tests on the test set.
These are exactly the same t tests that you ran up here.
But yeah here you're using the test set instead of the train set.
There's going to be a lot of results to visualize, and I want to get to most of those visualizations
in the next exercise.
Here in this exercise, you should just do one visualization, which is to plot the number of components
it took to explain 99% of the variability for each layer of the model.
Uh, of course, I'm not going to show you what those results will look like, but this is actually
literally a replication of an analysis that we did earlier in the course about effective dimensionality.
And you might remember that we got results that looked like this.
Now you can ignore the red squares.
That was for the randomly shuffled tokens.
What we found pretty consistently in this previous video was that the number of components that it took
to reach 99% of the variability generally increased as we got later into the model.
So deeper into the model.
Now this result here was for the hidden states.
That is the final output of the transformer layer.
And here in this exercise in this video you are working with the MLP expansion neurons.
So it's completely different parts of the transformer.
That means it is certainly not trivial that you will reproduce this result over here.
I'm just showing this figure here just to remind you of the pattern of results that we discovered earlier
in the course.
Okay.
I hope you enjoy working through this exercise.
Now you can pause the video and get to work.
And of course, I'm going to do what I always do here, which is switch to Python and discuss my solution.
So here is where I initialize this results matrix.
So results for every layer of the model.
There's going to be seven sets of results that I will store.
And then the two is for the test statistic and the p value loop over all of the layers.
Here I get the PCA, I call the PCA function, get all of those results, call the get function, get
all of those results.
And then here I run the test set.
So here is the uh sorry the T test.
So here is the T test for, uh, GED.
So the projections onto the him, uh, eigenvector for the him sentences and the projections onto the
him eigenvector for the, her sentences.
So this is what we designed the GED to maximize him versus her okay.
So I stored that and I get the t value and the p value.
And then I repeat that code.
Except it's now for the her analysis.
Uh so the eigenvector that maximizes activations for her greater than for him.
So now we actually expect this one these activations to be large and these activations to be relatively
small.
Whereas here we expect the opposite pattern.
Okay.
And then again I'm storing the t value.
And the p value here is the R value.
This is the correlation between the pattern for him and the pattern for her.
So the statistic the correlation coefficient.
And here we're just getting the the magnitude of that.
And then its p value.
And this is the top eigen value.
So eigen value for the Him analysis and for the her analysis.
And this is from the PCA with both the him and the her targets mixed together.
How many components does it take to get 99% of the variance explained.
Okay.
And then yeah here's the out-of-sample stuff.
So here we are looking at the test results here I'm getting all of the activations compressing them
down to 60.
In the previous two videos ago it was 63 dimensions.
it will be somewhere between 5060 or so, depending on the layer.
But yeah, anyway, projecting them down to a small number of dimensions relative to 3072 for the GPT
two small.
And now I am projecting those reduced dimensional activations onto the GED vectors.
Again, I am using the, uh, the eigenvectors, the analyses that I developed from the training set
and applying those vectors to the test set, and then exactly the same T tests exactly the same code
as I ran up here.
They're just yeah.
The main difference is they're stored in these different locations.
Uh, here you can see I'm skipping three and four, because when I first wrote this code, I was only
storing these.
Uh, I was not storing these.
And then.
Yeah, as I was developing the code further, I thought about also including these results.
But then I was kind of too lazy to change the code below the visualization code.
So therefore I decided to give these a later indexing.
Anyway, now I will run this code.
It's actually quite fast.
If you are curious, what you can do is go back to the PCA function from exercise three.
You can try commenting the scikit learn PCA code and uncommenting the manual code.
You will find that the results are identical, but it takes a lot longer.
Okay, so let me see.
Okay, so here we are.
And then yeah, I'm just visualizing, uh, this uh, penultimate part of the model, which is the dimensionality.
So the effective dimensionality over the layers, that is the number of components it takes to account
for 99% of the variability within each layer, monotonically.
Okay, not perfectly monotonically, but generally increases as we go deeper in the model from 45 components
up to around.
This is probably 63 components here at the very end.
Pretty neat to see that this finding replicates an analysis we did earlier in the course, even though
that is not the primary goal of this this analysis here.
We are now done with all of the analyses.
And so exercise six is just about exploring some of the visualizations.
There are three plots that you will make for exercise six.
The first one is this over here it is four sets of t values.
And these come from the t tests for the training data and the t tests for the test set data.
I'm showing the results here for layer one.
And of course it will be interesting to see what they look like for the rest of the layers.
In particular, the test set results.
Remember that there is no overfitting on the test set, so that's really the best evaluation of whether
the generalized eigendecomposition has uncovered something meaningful in the internal structure in the
model, or whether it just memorized an overfit the training set.
Now, you can use these markers for the statistically significant t tests.
And you can plot red X's wherever the T values were not statistically significant based on the corresponding
p value.
Next is the plot of the correlation between the two patterns from multiplying the eigenvector by the
covariance matrix, and then pre-multiplying that by the PCA vectors to get back into the original MLP
neuron space again because of the sign indeterminacy of the eigenvectors, you can just plot the absolute
value of the correlation here.
Now that gives you a measure of linear relationship and we don't have to worry about the sign.
And finally this plot over here, this is the largest eigenvalue from the two generalized eigendecomposition
is again plotted over the different layers.
Now larger eigenvalues indicate better separability of the components.
So it will be interesting to see whether the separability is related to the depth in the model, and
whether it differs between the two pronouns.
I will have some further discussions and interpretations about these results when I switch to code.
But of course, first you should switch to code and make these visualizations and see what you think.
As a p value threshold here I'm using 0.05 five.
Standard statistical threshold and then dividing by the number of layers.
So this is Bonferroni corrected for the number of layers.
And yeah for the x tick labels.
For some reason I decided to start counting at zero.
Uh, sorry, start counting at one instead of at zero.
I don't remember if there was a particular reason why I chose to do that.
So there's a lot of code here, but when you look through it, you will see that each of these code
lines is very simple.
All I'm doing is plotting the significant results.
Uh, and here the non-significant results for these different analyses.
So the, uh, train him versus her GED, the her versus him GED and so on.
So yeah, it's a lot of lines of code, but it's not a lot of unique lines of code.
Okay.
So basically what we see here is that it's pretty significant everywhere.
So we don't really need to worry too much about interpreting the magnitude of the t values.
The important thing is that for the test data set, we see lots of highly significant differences in
the activation all throughout the model.
So this tells us that when we trained the model on the these artificial him.her data sets sentences
that the generalized Eigendecomposition was really picking up on some meaningful internal structure
about the way that these models represent or process the pronouns him versus the pronouns her, because
that was reproduced significantly robustly when correcting for multiple comparisons over 12 different
layers in this entirely separate test set.
Okay.
And then here we see the correlation between the two patterns.
And they are pretty strong early in the model.
And then the correlation plummets down close to zero as we get deeper into the model.
And why might this be the case?
Well, keep in mind that earlier in the model.
So earlier in the transformer stream, the model is is focusing on processing that particular token.
And him and her those two tokens are quite similar.
The pronouns are often used in very similar ways.
So there's a lot of similarities between those two tokens.
But as we get deeper into the model, the model transitions from processing the actual token, the current
token, to making a prediction about the subsequent token.
And so, yeah, those patterns just seem to be kind of doing their own thing as we shift later into
the model.
Okay.
And then this is the final plot.
Here we are looking at the maximum eigen values.
And this is quite interesting.
So in general they don't really change that much for the him versus her?
Maybe.
Let me see if they, uh, let me comment this one out just to see.
Yeah.
Okay.
I mean, maybe the separability decreases a little bit as we get later into the model, but, uh, yeah,
we can discuss that later when, uh, when we also look forward, uh, in exercise seven, when we do
some other replication based analyses.
But certainly the most striking thing about this particular result is this massive increase in the separability
for her versus him.
Once we get to the second half of the model.
To be honest, I do not have a great clear interpretation of this finding.
Uh, and yeah, I mean, it's probably just related to differences in text for him versus her, but,
uh, yeah, I don't know what to make of this, but it is certainly quite, uh, robust.
Now, the thing about the eigenvalue magnitude, the raw eigenvalue itself is.
It's a little bit difficult to interpret on its own the raw value, because it depends on the scale
of the data.
So therefore I'm going to modify this analysis a little bit to take not the top eigenvalue, but the
ratio between the first and the second eigenvalues.
And let me show you in the graph what that looks like, what I mean by that.
That was actually the analysis, the visualization from the previous video.
What I two videos ago I introduced this method.
Okay.
So here the idea is that we want to look at the ratio of this value here to this value over here.
And the ratio of this number here to this number here.
And the idea is that the larger that ratio the more the top component is really clearly separable from
the rest of the distribution.
So to do that, I'm going back to the code from exercise four, going down here to where I export the
two top eigenvalues.
And then I'm going to say the first one divided by the second one.
And same thing here.
So the first one divided by let's see that's divided by the second one.
I did not explicitly tell you to do this in the instructions.
So I do not expect you to have done this.
It's just something that I am curious about to evaluate.
So it's a little bit of a cleaner way of looking at this result down here.
So now instead of just looking at the top eigenvalue, we're going to look at the ratio of the first
to the second eigenvalue.
And you see that this is still preserved.
So it does seem like the Herve versus him eigendecomposition is more separable.
The model had an easier time separating her versus him pronouns compared to him versus her pronouns.
And that effect is really just pronounced as we get deeper into the transformer.
Don't worry.
Exercise seven involves no new analyses and no new visualizations.
All I want you to do here is run the code for a different model.
So we ran all of the code so far on GPT two small.
And now you can pick another variant to test.
You don't need to do this in like a for loop over all the models.
You can just manually change the name of the model when you import it, and then rerun the entire code
from scratch.
I am going to rerun it using Excel, so using the largest GPT two variant that we have access to.
And yeah, you can use that one.
You can also use the large or the medium variant.
Now here when you rerun the code I want you to check for two things.
First of all, just make sure that the code file still works.
If you get any errors simply by changing the model size without changing anything else, then that means
that you have hard coded some variables and you should change that.
Secondly, you're looking for reproducibility of the key findings that you saw in the small version
of the model.
Now you don't need to check for reproducibility super rigorously or quantitatively.
You just want to look at the plots and make a qualitative judgment of whether the results follow the
same pattern.
Okay, so I hope you enjoy working through this one.
And now I will switch to code.
So here is the code from the very beginning of the code file.
And all I'm going to do here is write in dash x.
So now I'm going to load in the Excel version of the model.
And then I'm going to run all.
So run the entire script.
Again.
Most of this code runs through pretty quickly.
This is the longest thing to do here is just wait a few minutes for all of the tensors to load in.
All right, so with the Excel version of this model, it takes the model quite some time to import.
And then the other thing that takes a long time is processing the initial tokens.
This one you can see that took actually three minutes compared to seven seconds with GPT two small.
This is the sort of thing that this is probably also 1 or 2 seconds on the GPU, but I kept it on the
CPU and it was a few minutes.
Okay, so now we see the number of components to explain 99% of the variability generally continues
to increase as we go deeper in the model.
So that is a qualitative replication of what we saw in the small version of the model.
And now here we have these results here.
And again.
The most important things to look for are the t tests.
For the test set so that separate set that we did not use to create the.
Eigenvectors or the PCA vectors.
And you see it's not a perfect replication.
So here we do get a couple of layers where the T value is not statistically significant.
But overall we do see some nice replications.
So reproducibility in the generalization.
This one is also quite consistent with what we observed in the small version of the model, that the
patterns in the covariance matrices are more robustly correlated early in the model, and then the they
become decoupled as we go later in the model.
I'm not sure what's going on in here, but it's just one unusual data point.
So I would not overinterpret this particular point here.
Okay.
And then here this is also an interesting replication of what we saw in the previous model in GPT two
small.
So here we see that the separability for the her greater than him is larger than the separability for
him greater than her.
It's not an exact reproduction of the finding, which we don't expect anyway because these are different
models, very different numbers of parameters.
But overall, we do see a fairly similar set of results here.
Now this one is with the ratio because I didn't change that code.
If you would look at the overall separability just from the top model, that would be I'm going to do
that now as well, because I'm also pretty curious about how that's going to look.
So all I had to do is delete that ratio here and then run this code again over the layers.
This takes, I think, 30s or so, maybe less than that.
And then we can reproduce this plot down here.
Okay, so I'm going to run this plot again.
But just to look at this again so it peaks the difference between the two eigendecomposition peaks at
around a third of the way into the model.
And then the separability kind of steadily declines from there.
So then when we run it again, just looking at the top eigenvalue, we see an overall similar pattern.
And I'm not sure if this is meaningful here.
This flip in the difference.
But anyway that's what it looks like.
I hope you agree that generalized eigendecomposition is a bit more involved than some of the other analyses
we've done in this course, but it is a pretty interesting approach that has a lot of flexibility for
targeted adaptations and applications.
But I am sure you agree with me on this first point here, which is that complex systems are very difficult
to analyze and understand conceptually in terms of code and in terms of interpreting results.
And yeah, I think it's also very nice to see when analyses have replications built into them.
So that is to say, we did not explicitly have the goal of replicating the effective dimensionality
results.
And in fact, when I made those lectures back there, I was not thinking that I would have separate
lectures that would accidentally reproduce those findings.
It just kind of happened because when you start to work with a lot of analyses, you start to appreciate
the convergence of foundational analysis techniques.
These are methods that just keep appearing in lots of analysis applications.
And Eigendecomposition is certainly one of those foundational methods that keeps popping up.
The more time you spend doing data science.